---
title: "How I've passed the AWS Advanced Networking Specialty Exam"
date: 2022-02-02
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
Hello there! In this post, I would like to share some information regarding my overall journey and  learning experience which allowed me to pass the [AWS Advanced Networking Specialty](https://aws.amazon.com/certification/certified-advanced-networking-specialty/) exam. Especially, I would like to go through some of the materials I went thrugh in order to prepare to the exam. Do not expect that I will disclose any of the questions which appeared during the exam!

<!--more-->

The AWS Advanced Networking Specialty is my third AWS certification. Last year, I've passed the AWS Security Specialty. Back in 2020, when the COVID-19 pandemic began, I've decided to pursue the AWS Solution Architect Associate certificate as I though it would be a good starting point to get more familiarized with "the cloud" - after some time, I've obtained my first AWS certificate.

It's fair to say that before I've booked the AWS Advanced Networking Specialty exam, which I took on the 28th of January 2022, I've had a decent amount of knowledge regarding the AWS Cloud - besides the earlier mentioned certificates, my day-to-day job responsibilities are mainly related to day-0 operations - this means that I focus on infrastructure deployment automation using the Infrastructure as Code approach for Zero Trust Networks. As you can imagine, because of that, I had some practical experience with some of the networking services within AWS. But in my case, that definetly wasn't enought to prepare to the exam after looking at the [Exam Guide](https://d1.awsstatic.com/training-and-certification/docs-advnetworking-spec/AWS-Certified-Advanced-Networking-Specialty_Exam-Guide.pdf). Thus, I've decided to go through some external resources.

My first choice was the exam preparation course from Adrian Cantrill, which is available at [learn.cantrill.io/](https://learn.cantrill.io/) and costs 99$. In my opinion, Adrian did a fantastic job with the course and covered all of the topic needed to pass the exam. More than that - in case you are not familiar with some of the concepts - you will have the opportunity to start from the scratch and gain more and more knowledge going through the materials, which is awesome. When you finish the course material, I have the ability to test yourself with one text exam - quite a realistic one in my opinion. Definetly worth doing - the questions are reasonable and within the scope of the certification requirements.

After finishing the course provided by Adrian, I felt pretty prepared for the exam, but a little bit burned out because of the amount of time it took me go through the learning materials and some additional work I had to complete before the end of the year. I was lucky enough to have a 2 week long PTO scheduled just before the Holidays - this allowed me to rest a little bit and regain my focus. But after getting back from my time off, I felt that I need some refresher and didn't wanted to go through my course notes once again. Thus, I've decided resources provided in the [AWS Skill Builder](https://explore.skillbuilder.aws/learn), which are available for free. The training dedicated for the [Advanced Networking Specialty](https://explore.skillbuilder.aws/learn/course/external/view/elearning/109/exam-readiness-aws-certified-advanced-networking-specialty-digital) is 9 hours long and includes some sample questions. What's worth noticing, the course instructor is really great and conducts the course in a very pleasent way, with a fair dose of humor. The only downside of this course is the fact that the material is a little bit obsolete (for example - the Hybrid DNS topic), so it cannot be your only learning resource.

One week before the exam, as the final preparation piece, I've went through the [AWS Certified Advanced Networking Official Study Guide](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-certified-advanced/9781119439837/) - but to be clear, I've didn't read the whole book, just the Summary, Exam Essentials and the Exercises for every chapter - I simply didn't had the time to read everything - but if that's not the case for you - I feel like it's worth it based on the material I did read.

I have to say that the AWS Advanced Networking Specialty exam was definetly the thoughest I did in years. I've completed it after about 2 hours and 15 minutes, being quite confident that I've passed, but not entirely sure. I was really happy to see the "PASS" sign after ending the exam. I don't know my score yet, will look if AWS still provides that kind of information, I'm pretty sure that was the case for the previous certifications.

To sum up, the exam is really challenging and requires a lot of details to remember. Before you book your exam, be sure you are able to go through different architecture scenarios and apply that knowledge. If possible, complete some mock exams and at least to through the sample questions provided by AWS to get the gist of what I mean - it can make all the difference you need to succeed.

Thank you very much for reading! If you thinking about pursuing the certificate yourself - good luck, you will make it.